# P6: Data Visualization using D3
Student: Andy Miller 
Udacity's [Data Analyst Nanodegree](https://www.udacity.com/course/nd002)

## Background
This project represented a substantial departure from what I am used to.  I currently work for a Fortune 500 company, where we use a variety of tools to prepare and visualization data, primarily being Alteryx and Tableau.  I have used Tableau extensively and therefore am very accustomed to the drag and drop, yet powerful, interface.  Learning D3 was a substantial departure from what I am used to or comfortable with, however, I was EXTREMLY excited about this course for several reasons:
 
 1. D3 - Learning a new tool to augment my current visualization skills is a fruitful endeavor, in my eyes.  The D3 language is very powerful and far less abstract than a tool such as Tableau.  While Tableau allows many types of visualizations, it does abstract some of the other elements away from the user.  With D3, a user has a totally blank canvas, allowing him / her to define their exact layout and interaction.  For instance, Tableau does not (truly) support much in terms of transformations.  However, your abilities are endless with D3 and a web browser.  Further, I should note that I had no experience with CSS or HTML, but after working through the courses and searching on my own, I was equipped enough to be dangerous.
 2. The Udacity course exceeded my expectations in terms of digging into the world of visualization.  I enjoyed the discussion on understanding visualization principles, such as: choosing the appropriate chart, augmenting charts with the right encodings, telling a story with data, and understanding pre-attentive attributes and Gestalt Principles of Perception.
 3. The cameos.  I was impressed to see Cole Nussbaumer Knaflic and other references and learnings from others, such as: Alberto Cairo, Stephen Few and Edward Tufte.  Not to mention other visualization mentions from people like Andy Kriebel (an avid Tableau user and blogger).

Overall this broadened and deepened my knowledge of the world of visualization, which is much more than just a chart.  While the greatest learning from this lesson and project was D3, I really enjoyed the focus on telling a story with your data and ensuring message comprehension by using the right charts, encodings and other elements (such as overall presentation, transformations / motion). 

Using these learnings, I dove into D3 and the Titanic dataset to create a story that is simple, yet uniquely tells a story of survivability.

### Summary
My data visualization utilized the Titanic dataset, which lists and describes the attributes of all Titanic passengers (excluding crew), including information such as age of the passenger, sex, age, cabin class, and the fare paid to take the journey.  My visualization focuses on looking at several of the features that have been found to correlate well with survivability, that is: passenger sex, passenger age, fare paid, and cabin class.  Using these features, I was able to tell an explanatory story of survivability. Because I was focused on varying features, I decided to create several visualizations to explain survivability.  I used the following visuals for each of the features to tell this story, each matched to best show the data.

## Design 
_(Note: Feedback discussed in "Feedback" Section)_

As mentioned in my summary, I elected to use several visuals.  My design thinking is explained below for each section of charts:

 1. Overall Color Encoding - Because I was telling a story of survival, I used the same two colors across all charts, pink for died and light blue for survived.  This allows the user to comprehend the graphs much more efficiently.
 2. Pie Chart for Passengers Sex - I used three pie charts (all passengers, female passengers and male passengers).  Pie charts are regarded as less effective charts, however, when only showing a dissection of 3 or fewer variables, they are appropriate.  Because I was looking at survival, this was ideal (only two options: survived or died).  I also labeled each chart with the percentage of survival for quick comprehension.
 3. Bar Charts for Age and Fare - I used bar charts to show the comparability of the bins across both survived and died.  I further labeled each group of bars (across Survived and Died) with the percentage of survival such that the audience could easily comprehend that portion between the bins (e.g., of all passengers <13 years of age - 57.6% survived, while 42.4% died).  This was important, as the axis alone doesn’t facilitate efficient comprehension.  
 4. Tile "Unit" Chart for Passenger Class - A unit chart here was a nice choice as the user can clearly comprehend that there were far more passengers in the 3rd Class.  I also labeled each chart with the percentage of survival for quick comprehension.  Further, I enabled the ability for the user to look inside each square to see detail about the passenger, through tooltips, which was my key interactive element that D3 allowed me to implement.

I believe strongly in telling a story, so I decided to add some commentary between each of the elements, enabling efficient comprehension for the user as they worked through the story.  

## Feedback
My process for developing this visualization was as follows: 1) sketched out my original scatterplot idea, 2) circulated the visualization to the three people (my wife - no knowledge, my colleague (D3 experience), and my friend (works in Tableau quite a bit and understands design principles).  They had excellent findings that helped me refine my visualization.  Further, this is my second iteration of this project, and I received feedback from the reviewer.  This feedback and refinement is presented below (and can be reviewed by investigating index1.html (incorporating 1st feedback), index2.html (incorporating 2nd feedback), index3.html (incorporating 3rd feedback), index4 (first_submission).html (my first submission), index5.html (my further revision of the first submission before change my approach), and finally  index_final (final_submission).html which contains my complete revision post reviewer feedback.  All told, I have spent over 40 hours on this project and believe that all the feedback and revisions has produced a better product.  That feedback is discussed below: 

 1. My Wife - "I noticed very clearly that people that paid more and were younger, as well as older (and didn’t pay as much) survived more often.  This made sense as I would expect that passengers that paid more didn’t have to travel far to the deck and lifeboats and were likely first in.  I am curious how the siblings play in this."  With this feedback, I realized that it would be nice to encode the circle size with the number of siblings. 
 2. My Colleague - "(mentioned similar takeaway as my wife)... I am more curious about investigating the circles.  Here you don’t provide any way to find out who was the passenger or get an accurate value for the age and fare, without using a rule on the computer screen.  I would consider adding a tooltip."  That is exactly what I did, as adding tooltips was a great idea an allows the user to investigate the data on their own, as well as, get additional information about the passenger that wasn’t included in either of the axes (age and fare). 
 3. My Friend - "I notice what you are going for here and you make it very apparent that people that paid more, survived more often.  One thing that I would mention is that you dont allow me to break it down by things such as sex, or what if I wanted to see how children fared?  Overall, I think I understand your story, but with this additional information, I would understand your story better."  This was the feedback that allowed me to enable some of D3's great transformation abilities.  Therefore, I took his advice and added in an interval that cycled through: "Female Only", "Male Only", "Children Only" (13 and younger), and finally settling on all the passengers. 
 4. Myself - Finally, I took a good look at my visualization after incorporating this feedback and set out to make some changes.  I cleaned up my code, added some comments where I thought necessary, and labeled and adjusted the aesthetics of the axes.  But I wanted more.  I wanted the user to be able to not only see this interval cycling through the cohorts, but I wanted them to be able to rewind and focus on one.  Therefore, I add some buttons that allowed the user to select this AFTER the cohort cycling was done.  You will see this in the upper-right hand corner. 
 5. Myself - Prior to receiving my review back from the reviewer (on my first submission), I took some time to clean-up the visualization.  This primarily was in the form of commentary, labeling and overall clean-up.  My major revisions came from 1-4 and 6 (below - Udacity Reviewer).  
 6. Udacity Reviewer - I received a review on the first visualization and found that my visualization too open-ended and suffered from over-plotting, where overall, I failed to tell a story.  While I believe that I had made some progress with the index5.html file (particularly with supporting the visualization with labels and commentary), I knew that they were driving at something deeper.  I didn’t have an overall theme that I was driving at.  I didn’t help the audience understand the point that I was trying to make.  Therefore, I went back to the drawing board to tell a story.  What I came up with is something totally different, focused on telling a more straightforward tale of survivability through several key passenger attributes, specifically by showing the rates of survival for different groups of data.  My original scatterplot did not show a very strong correlation, therefore I decided to take to presenting separate charts to paint an overall picture of survivability.  Finally, I supplemented all of this with much stronger labeling, titling and commentary.  

Through all that feedback, I have a visualization that I can be certain tells an actual story, focused on survivability.  Please refer to my submission for the key findings. 

## Resources

 - Enter, Update, Exit - https://medium.com/@c_behrens/enter-update-exit-6cafc6014c36#.j6mcoko3a
 - Update Pattern Understanding: http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/3808218
 - Arrays Help: https://github.com/d3/d3/wiki/Arrays
 - Reading in Data: http://learnjsdata.com/read_data.html
 - Color Principles - http://www.stonesc.com/pubs/Expert%20Color%20Choices.pdf
 - Gestalt Principles of Perception - http://www.slideshare.net/luisaepv/the-gestalt-laws-of-perception
 - Titanic Data and Feature Understanding - https://www.kaggle.com/c/titanic/data 
 - Stack Overflow Questions - http://stackoverflow.com/questions/37374121/d3-javascript & http://stackoverflow.com/questions/37201580/trouble-loading-data-for-titanic-visualization